So, now, what is metamirism, they are composed having the same molecular formula and the
same functional group also, but they differ only in the size of the alkyl groups on both
size of a polyvalent atom or group. Suppose, I take this example C 4 H 10 O, the polyvalent
atom here is oxygen. So, now, first let us start one by one, first let us calculate
the dB here. So, dBE, if we calculate this will be equal to 0 and this will have the
general formula C and H 2 and plus 2. So, when dB equal to 0, please remember that it cannot
be aldehyde and ketone because we are ruling out the double bond category here. So, now, this
could be if one oxygen is it, it could be only an alcohol or a ether. So, now, I have just written
some of the functional groups like you know the isomers here. So, one is with alcohol,
other one with ether. Now, I have written this one alcohol here, which is in the first position
OH group is there, here in the second position OH group is there, here it is taking a tertiary position
the alcohol group. Now, when I see here, we cannot say that these compounds are metamers because
as I told the alcohol groups we it has to differ with the alcohol groups on both sides of the
polyvalent group. So, now here on one side there is alcohol group and other side only hydrogen.
So, this is not an alcohol group. Similarly, here one side all these are alcohol groups and hydrogen
similarly here also. So, these will not come under metamers. Now, only the thing is with ethers.
So, now, we see here this ethers, see here this side there are two carbons and this side there are
two carbons. Similarly, I have written another structure where there are the three carbons here
and one carbon here. So, when we consider 4 and 5, they are called metamers.
Okay. Similarly, if I take 5 and 6, they are not metamers because here also 3 carbons,
here also 3 carbons. So, here this would be chain isomers. Chain isomers.
Consider, now 4 and 6, here there are two, here there are two, here there are three,
here there is one. So, now even 4 and 6 are metamers.
Now, coming to another one with alcohols, here the OH position is in the first carbon,
here in the second carbon. So, if we consider these two, so one and two will show position isomers.
So, now coming to 2 and 3, okay. So, here also in the second position OH which is
there, here also second position, but the chain length is differing. So, these two will come
under 2 and 3 will come under chain isomers. So, similarly, if I say 1 and 4, then
they differ in their functional groups. So, 1 and 4 are functional isomers.
Okay. So, now when it comes to position here, now I want to explain one more thing here,
when we consider 4 and 5, there is difference in the position of the functional group.
Okay. So, when it comes to both position and metamers, metamers will take the priority,
compared to the position isomers. So, the next isomers is stortomers isom. So, what is
stortomers isom? It is defined as when two different structures having the same molecular formula
will undergo a rearrangement due to hydrogen. So, that is also called the 1, 3 hydrogen shift.
So, let us explain this with some examples. Now, here I have taken a ketone, okay. So, this can
undergo a rearrangement. So, let me number this as 1, 2 and 3. As I said here, it
will undergo 1, 3, hydrogen shift. So, from the first position, it will go to the third position.
As a result, this double bond will shift here. So, we can write this as CH2, double bond,
CH3. Now, this is a ketone and this is having a double bond and OH. So, this is called
E0. So, this is the ketone form and this is the E0 form, okay. So, such isomers are called tautomers,
okay. So, now here, if I take another example here, let us see this. Here, there is a nitrogrope here.
Now, let us see how it undergoes a rearrangement. Let me number this as 1, 2 and 3. Again,
there will be a 1, 3 hydrogen shift, okay. Now, here this hydrogen in the third position. So,
this one will go to the first position as the result, the double bond will shift here.
So, the compound would be CH3, CH double bond and OH and OH minus, okay. So, now, if you see,
this is a nitrogrope, whereas this is the hydroxyl nitrogrope. Now, these two are also again called
tautomeric structures. Now, here, let us take an amine here. So, if I, if there is an NH2 group,
it is called an amine group. Now, again, if I consider this as 1, 2 and 3, okay. There will be
hydrogen shift. Now, I can take this hydrogen and shift it to the third position. So, this can be
CH3, single bond, CH double bond, NH. So, this is a amine group and this is called
let me write it down. This is an amine group and this is called an amine. When there is a double bond
attached to NH, it is called amine group. Now, let us see some more examples. Here, I have taken some
aromatic compounds. Here, there is an aldehyde and here, I have taken a ketone. Now, here,
it is, there is no tautomerism possible, so, tautomerism possible, because here, this hydrogen,
this hydrogen cannot shift. Whereas, if I consider this carbon here, there is no hydrogen there.
So, there is no hydrogen here and in this side only hydrogen is there, it does not attach to any
carbon. So, this compound will not undergo tautomerism. Whereas, the same thing, I have substituted
hydrogen with a methyl group here. As we see in this carbon, there is no hydrogen, but whereas,
in this carbon, there is hydrogen. So, if I number this as 1, 2 and 3, this hydrogen can
undergo a shift. So, this could be written like this. So, C double bond, C H to again here,
we can see ketofone and anineol form. So, these are some examples of tautomerism.